Now, there's much for us to think about in these words of Proverbs 12 and verse 18.
And to all of us, we like to think of ourselves as wise, but we all know that from time to time
we still stab our brothers and sisters with our speech, thoughtless speech.
Now, we all know that we need to watch our speech, say things that are positive or upbuilding,
but isn't it true that sometimes we may find that we have ourselves in a negative thinking
pattern that we cannot get out of that exhibits itself in our speech.
Well, what can help us?
Well, you notice our theme, Scripture in Proverbs 12, 18 says the tongue of a wise person
is a healing.
So what can help us to be wise?
What can help us to have healing and positive speech?
Well, let's consider three things this morning.
The first is a wise person's maintained perspective.
Now sometimes we may find that our speech is negative or cutting because we're frustrated.
But yet stepping back and looking at things from a broader perspective, many times can
help us to be wise, to control our tongue.
Now in this context, many times I think about Job.
When we look at Job's words, we find that he really said some hurtful things.
Job chapter 40 and verse 2, Job calls Job a fault finder.
Job was finding fault with Jehovah.
Why?
Well, from Job's perspective, an injustice was being done.
In fact, turn, if you will, to Job chapter 9.
Just notice some of the things that Job says about Jehovah.
Job 9 verses 15 through 18, just skimming through there.
You notice in verse 15, he says, even if I were in the right, I would not answer him.
If I call out to him, will he answer me?
I do not believe he'll even listen to my voice.
Verse 17, he crushes me with a storm.
18, he does not let me catch my breath.
Look at verse 34 and 35.
Job says of Jehovah, if he would just stop beating me, then I would speak to him unafraid.
Why, these words are stabs of a sword, stinging criticism of Jehovah.
But now, what helped Job to correct his thinking and therefore, again, to have positive speech?
It was perspective.
Remember, Jehovah pulled him back to see things from a different perspective.
And how we think of the words there and his questions in Job 38, where Jehovah says,
well, Job, let me ask you a few questions now.
Can you remind me again, where was it you were at when I created the earth?
I don't remember seeing you anywhere.
Or who commands the morning?
Or Job, let me ask you, where does light come from?
Ideas?
I didn't think so.
See, what was Jehovah doing?
See, Jehovah was pulling Job back to see things from a broader perspective.
It allowed him to see his issues in context.
And what was the result?
Well, in Job 42, in verse 3, he says, I spoke without understanding.
In verse 6, he says, can you just take back everything I said, just erase what I said?
What's the point?
The point is, is that meditating on a broader perspective can help us to have positive
speech.
See, we have to remember that it's not all about us.
The world does not revolve around us, and there are bigger issues at play.
And that perspective can help us to be wise.
It can help us to control our speech.
Now second point is that a wise person is humble.
And notice what a wise person will do.
Look at Proverbs chapter 1 and verse 5.
Proverbs 1 verse 5 says, a wise person listens and takes in more instruction.
Now it takes humility to listen.
Now we contrast at what Proverbs chapter 18 and verse 2.
Proverbs chapter 18 verse 2 says, a stupid person takes no pleasure in understanding.
He would rather disclose what is in his heart.
You see, a stupid person, he doesn't have time to listen.
He array knows what the story is and therefore speaks accordingly.
Well, am I a wise or a stupid person?
We'll see humility will help us to realize that we do not always have the whole story.
We don't always have all the facts.
And when we listen and we get a full perspective, many times that changes our thinking.
How many times that's happened to you?
I know it's happened to me that once we step back, we hear the whole story, we realize
we didn't know what we were talking about.
We weren't speaking out of wisdom, but rather out of ignorance.
You see, that realization, that humility will then help us do what it says here in Proverbs 17 and verse 27.
Notice what a wise person does.
See, a man of knowledge restrains his words, a discerning man will remain calm.
So what's the point?
Well, the point is humility can help us to be wise.
Humble people listen to others and therefore realizing that we don't have all the facts
and helps us to restrain our words, remain calm and to be wise.
Now our third point is that a wise person is realistic.
And we have to be careful that we do not overthink things at times.
You see, in this organization, we have just absolutely brilliant brothers and sisters.
Many of you, you can look at a situation and see how to straighten it out and make it faster,
smoother, better, more efficient, and that is a gift.
But we have to be careful that we do not overthink things.
See, sometimes we may look at something and say, well, you know, that is the most ridiculous
process I've ever seen in my life.
And you know what, maybe it is, but we cannot optimize everything.
It will only end up frustrating ourselves, which will cause us to be cynical, which ends
up coming out in our speech.
Now I find the book of Ecclesiastes of much benefit as it carries realistic thinking.
Look at Ecclesiastes chapter 2 and verse 15.
Ecclesiastes 2, 15 says, then I said in my heart, what happens to the stupid one will also
happen to me.
What then did I gain by becoming excessively wise?
This too is futility.
You see, we may have a better solution.
Good.
Share it.
Share it with our oversight.
Be wise.
But Solomon's reminding us, do not be excessively wise.
Do not become so fixated on it that we start to become bitter, which comes out in our
speech.
As we've heard before, we cannot expect perfection from an imperfect process where imperfect
people are involved.
If we expect that, we'll only end up frustrating ourselves and others.
We also remember that anyone can complain about an imperfect process.
That's easy to do.
All of us can do that.
But the real gem of a person, the one that can be used and most by Jehovah is the one
who can take an imperfect process and make it work.
Now along that line, we may think of Jesus.
He could have spent his last three and a half years of life here on earth, complaining
to Jehovah, couldn't he?
See, he could have complained about the imperfect men that he had to work with.
He could have complained about the failed religious structure that was in place.
He could have complained that he didn't even have a decent place to live.
Why foxes and birds live better than I do?
He could have complained about the flaws in the temple arrangement and the synagogue.
There's many things Jesus could have complained about and he could have become bitter.
This would have reflected itself in his speech, but he didn't do that.
See, Jesus is a beautiful example of taking an imperfect process and still making it a success,
making it work.
And so therefore, this helped him to be positive.
This helped him to speak in a way that others said never has another man spoken like this.
So what's the point?
Well, the point is, is that perspective, humility, being realistic.
This can help us to be wise and this can help us to have healing and positive speech
with our dear brothers and sisters that we work with and we live with.